Languages of the Caucasus - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Languages of the Caucasus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
(Redirected from Caucasian language)
Jump to: navigation, search
This article does not cite any references or sources.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2006)
Ethno-Linguistic groups in the Caucasus region
The languages of the Caucasus are a large and extremely varied array of languages spoken by more than ten million people in and around the Caucasus Mountains, which lie between the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea.
Linguistic comparison allows these languages to be classified into several language families, with little or no discernible affinity to each other.
Contents
1 Families indigenous to the Caucasus
1.1 External relations
1.1.1 North Caucasian languages
1.1.2 Ibero-Caucasian languages
1.1.3 Hattic
1.1.4 Alarodian
1.1.5 Dené-Caucasian macrofamily
2 Families with wider distribution
2.1 Indo-European
2.2 Altaic
2.3 Semitic
3 References
4 Notes
5 External links
 Families indigenous to the Caucasus
Three of these families have no current members outside the Caucasus, and are considered indigenous to the area. The term Caucasian languages is generally restricted to these families.
South Caucasian, also called the Kartvelian family. Includes Georgian, the official language of Georgia, with four million speakers.
Northwest Caucasian, also called the Abkhaz-Adyghe, Circassian, or Pontic family. Includes the Kabardian language, with one million speakers.
Northeast Caucasian, also called the Dagestanian, Nakho-Dagestanian, or Caspian family. Includes the Chechen language, Avar language, Ingush language, Lezgian language, and others. With three million speakers.
It is commonly believed that all Caucasian languages have a large number of consonants. While this is certainly true for most members of the Northwest and Northeast Caucasian families (inventories range up to the 80-84 consonants of Ubykh), the consonant inventories of the South Caucasian languages are not nearly as extensive, ranging from 28 (Georgian) to 30 (Laz) — comparable to languages like Arabic (28 consonants), Western European languages (20-21), and Russian (35-37 consonants).
The autochthonous languages of the Caucasus share some areal features, such as the presence of ejective consonants and a highly agglutinative structure, and, with the sole exception of Mingrelian, all of them exhibit a greater or lesser degree of ergativity. Many of these features are shared with other languages that have been in the Caucasus for a long time, such as Ossetian.
 External relations
Since the birth of comparative linguistics in the 19th century, the riddle of the apparently isolated Caucasian language families has attracted the attention of many scholars, who have endeavored to relate them to each other or to languages outside the Caucasus region. The most promising proposals are connections between the Northwest and Northeast Caucasian families and each other or with languages formerly spoken in Anatolia and northern Mesopotamia.
 North Caucasian languages
Main article: North Caucasian languages
Linguists such as Sergei Starostin see the Northwest (Abkhaz-Adyghe) and Northeast (Nahk-Dagestanian) families as related and propose uniting them in a single North Caucasian family, sometimes called Caucasic or simply Caucasian. This theory excludes the South Caucasian languages, thereby proposing two indigenous language families. While these two families share many similarities, their morphological structure, with many morphemes consisting of a single consonant, make comparison between them unusually difficult, and it has not been possible to establish a genetic relationship with any certainty.
 Ibero-Caucasian languages
Main article: Ibero-Caucasian languages
There are no known affinities between the South Caucasian and North Caucasian families. Nevertheless, some scholars have proposed the single name Ibero-Caucasian for all the Caucasian language families, North and South, in an attempt to unify the Caucasian languages under one family.
 Hattic
Some linguists have claimed affinities between the Northwest Caucasian (Circassian) family and the extinct Hattic language of central Anatolia. See the article on Northwest Caucasian languages for details.
 Alarodian
Alarodian is a proposed connection between Northeast Caucasian and the extinct Hurro-Urartian languages of Armenia.
 Dené-Caucasian macrofamily
Main article: Dené-Caucasian languages
Linguists such as Sergei Starostin have proposed a Dené-Caucasian macrofamily, which includes the North Caucasian languages together with Basque, Burushaski, Na-Dené, Sino-Tibetan, and Yeniseian. Most linguists consider this proposal to be beyond the range of historical linguistics.
 Families with wider distribution
Other languages historically and currently spoken in the Caucasus area can be placed into families with a much wider geographical distribution.
 Indo-European
The predominant Indo-European language in the Caucasus is Armenian, spoken by the Armenians (circa 4 million speakers). The Ossetians, speaking the Ossetic language, form another group of around 700,000 speakers. Other Indo-European languages spoken in the Caucasus include Persian, Greek, Pontic, Kurdish, Talysh, Judeo-Tat, Bukhori and of the Slavic languages, Russian and Ukrainian, whose speakers number over a third of the total population of the Caucasus.
 Altaic
Most of the Altaic languages spoken in the Caucasus are Turkic: of these, Azerbaijani is predominant, with around 6 million speakers in Azerbaijan. Other Turkic languages spoken include Balkar, Karachay, Kumyk, Nogai.
Kalmyk, spoken by the Oirat descendant Kalmyks in the region is a Mongolic language.
 Semitic
The only Semitic language spoken in the Caucasus is Assyrian Neo-Aramaic, spoken by around 25,000 speakers, largely living in cities, who fled to Russia from Turkish persecution at the close of the First World War.
 References
Encyclopedia Britannica, 15th edition (1986): Macropedia, "Languages of the World", see section titled "Caucasian languages".
 Notes
 External links
A nice map depicting the languages in the Caucasus: http://www.hunmagyar.org/turan/caucasus/index.html
TITUS: Caucasian languages map by Jost Gippert projects Armazi Ecling
CIA ethnolinguistic map
Linguistic families map by Matthew Dryer
Caucausian Dictionary
Caucausian section of the Red Book of the Peoples of the Russian Empire
The Iberian-Caucasian Connection in a Typological Perspective — An in-depth linguistic study of Basque, Georgian, and other ergative languages, concluding that the similarities are not strong enough to prove a genetic link.
The A. Chikobava Institute of Linguistics, Georgian Academy of Sciences
Atlas of the Caucasian Languages with very detailed Language Guide (by Yuri B. Koryakov)
The Graphic Model and the Maps of the Urheimat of the North Caucasian and Abkhaz-Adyghean Languages
Comparative Notes on Hurro-Urartian, Northern Caucasian and Indo-European by V. V. Ivanov
<!--
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor node count: 388/1000000
Post-expand include size: 5069/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 1935/2048000 bytes
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
-->
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Languages_of_the_Caucasus"
Categories: Languages of the CaucasusHidden categories: Articles lacking sources from December 2006 | All articles lacking sources
Views
Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History
Personal tools
Try Beta
Log in / create account
Navigation
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Search
Interaction
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help
Toolbox
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page
Languages
Aragonés
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Latina
Lietuvių
Líguru
Magyar
Македонски
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
中文
This page was last modified on 31 January 2010 at 15:16.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.
See Terms of Use for details.
Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.Contact us
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
