Namib Desert - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Namib Desert
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to: navigation, search
This article is missing citations or needs footnotes. Please help add inline citations to guard against copyright violations and factual inaccuracies. (December 2007)
Tall sand dunes in the Namib desert
Sossusvlei
The Namib Desert is a desert in Namibia and southwest Angola that forms part of the Namib-Naukluft National Park. The name "Namib" is of Nama origin and means vast.
The desert occupies an area of around 80900km² (31200square miles), stretching about 1000 miles (1,600 km) along the Atlantic Ocean coast of Namibia. Its east-west width varies from 30 to 100 miles (50-160km). The Namib Desert also reaches into southwest Angola. It is one of the 500 distinct physiographic provinces of the South African Platform physiographic division.
Having endured arid or semi-arid conditions for at least 55 million years, it is considered to be the oldest desert in the world. The Namib's aridity is caused by the descent of dry air of the Hadley Cell, cooled by the cold Benguela current along the coast. It has less than 10mm (0.4 inches) of rain annually and is almost completely barren.
A number of unusual species of plants and animals are found only in this desert. One of these is Welwitschia mirabilis, one of the most unusual species. Welwitschia is a shrub-like plant, but grows just two long strap-shaped leaves continuously throughout its lifetime. These leaves may be several meters long, gnarled and twisted from the desert winds. The taproot of the plant develops into a flat, concave disc in age. Welwitschia is notable for its survival in the extremely arid conditions in the Namib, sometimes deriving moisture from the coastal sea fogs.
Although the desert is largely unpopulated and inaccessible, there are year-round settlements at Sesriem, close to the famous Sossusvlei and a huge group of sand dunes, which at more than 300 meters high are among the tallest sand dunes in the world. The complexity and regularity of dune patterns in its dune sea have attracted the attention of geologists for decades. They still remain poorly understood.
Panoramic of the Namib Desert in the area of Spitzkoppe
The interaction between the water-laden air coming from the sea via southerly winds, some of the strongest of any coastal desert, and the dry air of the desert causes immense fogs and strong currents, causing sailors to lose their way. Along with the Skeleton Coast further north, it is notorious as the site of many shipwrecks. Some of these wrecked ships can be found as much as 50 metres inland, as the desert slowly moves westwards into the sea, reclaiming land over a period of many years.
The Namib desert is an important location for the mining of tungsten, salt and diamonds. As documented in some extraordinary detail in the BBC Planet Earth (TV series) episode #5 on deserts, there is a struggle for existence in this desert by elephants, lions, oryx and other valiant survivors, a struggle that is surprising in that anything can find sustenance here at all. (A pair of oryx is seen on the Namibian coat of arms.)
Access is by light aircraft from Windhoek (the capital of Namibia, about 480km north-east of the centre of the desert), Swakopmund and Walvis Bay at the north end of the desert, or overland on gravel roads.
 Gallery
Camel Thorn Tree (Acacia erioloba) in Sossusvlei region
The dune sea of the Namib Desert. The crests of the dunes are aligned in a marked northwest-southeast orientation. The dunes act as obstacles, causing the winds to be deflected significantly to the right, in effect reorienting the southerly wind to become a southwesterly wind.
Sunset at the Namib Rand Nature Reserve, Namibia.
Satellite image of the Namib Desert.
Namib Desert seen from Spot satellite
Namib Desert seen from Spot satellite
 See also
Bogenfels
List of deserts by area
Animals are Beautiful People, a nature documentary set in the Namib
 References
^ http://www.nationalgeographic.com/wildworld/profiles/terrestrial/at/at1315.html World Wildlife Fund and National Geographic info sheet
^ Namib desert (AT1315) World Wide Fund for Nature site on the Namib Desert
National Geographic, January 1992, pp. 54-85.
"Dune Patterns, Namib Desert, Namibia". NASA Earth Observatory. http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Newsroom/NewImages/images.php3?img_id=17050. Retrieved 2006-05-05.
Namib Naukluft Park photo gallery
Namib Desert photo gallery
Mary Seely: The Namib: Natural History of an Ancient Desert, 3rd ed., Windhoek: Desert Research Foundation of Namibia 2004, ISBN 99916-68-16-0.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Namib Desert
v•d•e
Geography topics
Geography· History of geography
Branches
Human
Behavioral· Cultural· Demography· Development· Economic· Feminist· Health· Historical· Political· Regional· Urban
Physical
Biogeography· Climatology· Coastal· Environmental· Geodesy· Geomorphology· Glaciology· Hydrology· Landscape ecology· Limnology· Oceanography· Palaeogeography· Pedology· Quaternary science
Techniques
Cartography· Geographic Information Systems (GIS)· Geostatistics· Global Positioning System (GPS)· Remote sensing· Spatial analysis· Qualitative research
Societies
American Geographical Society· Association of American Geographers· European Geography Association· Geographical Association· Hong Kong Geographical Association· International Geographical Union· National Geographic Society· Royal Canadian Geographical Society· Royal Geographical Society· Royal Scottish Geographical Society· Russian Geographical Society· Saudi Geographical Society· Société de Géographie· Society of Woman Geographers
Lists
Index· Geographers· Outline
Portal
v•d•e
Subfields of physical geography
Biogeography· Climatology/ Paleoclimatology· Coastal geography· Geomorphology· Glaciology· Hydrology/ Hydrography· Landscape ecology· Limnology· Oceanography· Palaeogeography· Pedology· Quaternary science
v•d•e
Deserts
Africa
Bayuda Desert· Chalbi Desert· Danakil Desert· Eastern Desert· Ferio Desert· Kalahari Desert· Libyan Desert· Namib Desert· Nubian Desert· Nyiri Desert· Richtersveld· Sahara· Ténéré· White Desert
Asia
Ad-Dahna Desert· Arabian Desert· Aral Karakum· Aralkum· Badain Jaran Desert· Betpak-Dala· Cholistan Desert· Dasht-e Kavir· Dasht-e Lut· Dasht-e Margoh· Dasht-e Naomid· Gurbantünggüt Desert· Gobi Desert· Hami Desert· Indus Valley Desert· Judean Desert· Karakum Desert· Kharan Desert· Kumtag Desert· Kum-tagh Desert· Kyzyl Kum· Lop Desert· Nefud· Negev· Ordos Desert· Qaidam· Rub' al Khali· Registan Desert· Saryesik-Atyrau Desert· Syrian Desert· Taklamakan Desert· Tengger Desert· Thal Desert· Thar· Tihamah· Ustyurt Plateau· Wahiba Sands
Australia
Gibson Desert· Great Sandy Desert· Great Victoria Desert· Little Sandy Desert· Nullarbor Plain· Painted Desert· Pedirka Desert· Simpson Desert· Strzelecki Desert· Sturt's Stony Desert· Tanami Desert· Tirari Desert
Europe
Accona Desert· Alpine· Bardenas Reales· Błędów Desert· Cabo de Gata· Deliblatska Peščara· Hálendi· Oleshky Sands· Oltenian Sahara· Ryn Desert· Tabernas Desert
North America
Alvord Desert· Amargosa Desert· Baja California Desert· Black Rock Desert· Carcross "Desert"· Channeled scablands· Chihuahuan Desert· Escalante Desert· Gran Desierto de Altar· Great Basin· Great Salt Lake Desert· Jornada del Muerto· Mojave Desert· Nk'mip "Desert"· Owyhee Desert· Painted Desert· Red Desert· Sonoran Desert
Polar regions
Antarctica· Arctic (North American Arctic)
South America
Atacama Desert· La Guajira Desert· Los Médanos de Coro· Monte Desert· Patagonian Desert· Sechura Desert· Tatacoa Desert
Oceania
Kaʻū Desert· Rangipo Desert
See also List of deserts and List of deserts by area
Coordinates: 24°45′07″S 15°16′35″E﻿ / ﻿24.75194°S 15.27639°E﻿ / -24.75194; 15.27639
<!--
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor node count: 3274/1000000
Post-expand include size: 100192/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 60788/2048000 bytes
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
-->
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Namib_Desert"
Categories: Physical geography | Deserts of Namibia | Ecoregions | Ergs | Physiographic provincesHidden categories: Articles with unsourced statements from December 2007 | All articles with unsourced statements
Views
Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History
Personal tools
Try Beta
Log in / create account
Navigation
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Search
Interaction
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help
Toolbox
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page
Languages
العربية
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Français
Gàidhlig
한국어
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Kiswahili
Lietuvių
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Slovenčina
Shqip
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Tiếng Việt
中文
This page was last modified on 24 February 2010 at 15:29.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.
See Terms of Use for details.
Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.Contact us
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
